Okay just to follow up the last question I was asking on the Alfar. Um I know
you've written some at least one essay. I think you've also published some books
having to do with, um, with Tolkien's, Lord of the Rings, Middle Earth. I
haven't published a book but I have been represented in a couple of books of
Tolkien criticism. I was a Tolkien fan before it became so terribly popular.
Yeah I know that. Okay, um Was there any relationship between Tolkien's elves
and the elf farm? Only in the sense that they both come from the British and
Norse mythology. Tolkien is a linguist and he was studying the relationships
between the languages of Scandinavia and those of Middle English. And the Elf
people came probably down with the Vikings Or those who preceded the Vikings
Norse migrant people moving down into the British Isles And in Norse mythology,
of course, the troll folk The people of the hill and things like that Were
always sort of there As sometimes sinister Sometimes very beautiful sometimes
with a good and sometimes with a bad relationship to man. But always they were
there, as you might say. They were always in the background of all that
mythology, and Tolkien used them, and I used them too because they are a factor
in human thought, and they are an archetypal image in humanity. Paul Anderson's
story, The Queen of Air and Darkness, plays on this. That's one of the big
images which come from the pictures of the troll folk in relationship to
humanity. Right, yeah, I'm familiar with that particular work. By the way, my
field... I'm an English teacher. My field is middle and old English, so I
respond very much to this kind of folklore and so forth. Okay, back to the house
-between-the-worlds for a moment. I think you were deliberately a little vague
on this because you probably didn't want to specify but the idea of the game
table where these people, you know, play Dungeons and Dragons, sometimes they're
actually playing the game, and then sometimes when the gate is there, they're
actually manipulating the gates between the universes. Is that the way you meant
it to be taken? More or less. It was sort of a, well, I can't think what else
Dungeons and Dragons players are good for. I decided I might as well make them
good for something. Okay, yeah. But one of the people at the game board near the
end of the book, they've taken Arthurian names from Knights of the Round Table.
And I think you said that they've been playing that game since the days of
Arthur or something. I wasn't sure what you meant by that reference. Well, I
don't know. Sometimes things come to an author and you don't know what it means,
but it seems to have an incredible rightness somehow. And you just can't...
I tried to rewrite that several times because I said, well, that doesn't really
mean anything. And I don't know what it means, but every time I tried to change
it, it didn't feel right, and so I finally put it back the way it had come and
figured, well, maybe it will mean something to somebody else. Maybe there's some
deep meaning to it that I'll know later about. Maybe it was just laziness, but
as I say, I kept feeling that there was some meaning to it, and every time I
tried to change it, it didn't feel right, so I let it stand. now that's what i
figured something to my editor because he liked it wouldn't let me change it no
i responded to it i thought it was fine you know and i realized i was sure you
didn't mean it to be anything specific but it added to the atmosphere of the
book and i enjoyed it i just thought i'd ask in case that was what i was trying
to do okay listen do you have um i always ask an author this i guess i shouldn't
but i want to see what comes out uh do you have do you have any, among your
works, do you have any favorite books? Well, usually, whenever anybody asks me
anything like that, I remember the line in Kristen Laverstetter, which is one of
my favorite books, where she said that the one of her children she was thinking
about was always the one she thought was the nicest. And I think that probably
an author's latest book is always the one he likes best because you had a chance
to improve on the things that you didn't think were right in previous books. But
I think if I had to say... One book of mine is a favorite. I would say it is the
double set of Heritage of Hastur and Shara's Exile. And the one that I think is
technically best is Storm Queen. Okay, fine. I think I read that about the
Heritage of Hastur one time, that you had mentioned that. Listen, let me just
ask you a couple questions about your method of writing. Do you sit down with a
theme or an idea in mind and start writing, or do you just write and something
comes out of it naturally? Well, I do both. I write naturally and spontaneously
sort of to keep my creative juices flowing. But when I'm actually writing a book
for publication, I sit down. I try to create a character that is interesting to
me and that I think people will enjoy reading about. And then I just let that
character have adventures. And so in letting this thing, I always know where I'm
going when I start a book because I have been known to start a book and never be
able to finish it because I didn't know where it was going. I hadn't planned
enough. Hadn't planned it out meticulously enough. so I always know when I
actually start a book roughly where it is going but I sort of wander from here
to there and then afterward cut out the things that aren't applicable because it
keeps me thinking about what's happening I do tend to sort of daydream over my
stories and characters and every now and then some idea picture pops into my
head and I will keep on for instance the shattered chain popped into my head
because I had a picture of Kendra the Free Amazon lurking about around the house
outside the house of Jalak in the dry towns ready to rescue somebody. I didn't
know who she was going to rescue, I didn't know why she was there, I just had
this picture. And so I tried to figure, okay, who is she trying to rescue and
why? And I figured, well, it wouldn't be important enough if it was just one of
her relatives. And then Lady Rohana popped in and everything became clear and
the book just went on from there. Okay good um I've read before and I think I
sort of agree with this that science fiction is not noted as a as strong in
characterization it's strong in adventure and action and plot but kind of weak
on character but I've always thought that you are probably one of the strongest
of all science fiction writers in terms of characterization you make your people
very real and it seems to me to go to great lengths to and make them deep and
round and believable, is that something that comes naturally to you, or do you
have to work at that? Well, actually, I think it comes naturally to me because
my characters are very real to me.
They are very real to me, and I sort of live with them, and I feel that I know
them very well. So I sort of live with them a while, and they become as real to
me as people I might meet in the street. If I met one of them in the street, I
would know immediately who he or she was.
Okay, fine. Really, I don't create stories and have characters that will fill
them. I try to fill my stories up with characters who are capable of doing the
things they're supposed to do. I mean, if you want a man to go out and hunt a
bear, you can't make him a little pantywaist who has spent his life in a
library. story, but on the other hand, I don't twist my characters. I started
out envisioning Damon, for instance, who wrote into the story Spell Sword. It
was supposed to be about Andrew. But Damon sort of walked into the story and all
of a sudden I knew that he was going to wind up using the spell sword even
though I made it clear that he didn't consider himself a great swordsman, had no
very great ideas of his own abilities. Okay. OK, do you have time to read much
science fiction or fantasy these days? I don't read an enormous amount when I'm
working because I'm partly afraid of obvious overlaps and unconscious
plagiarism. But it's also true that when I'm writing it I like to keep my mind
clear for the fantasy universe I'm working in. When I'm writing I mostly read
travel books, biographies another thing of characterization,oseration, personal
confessions.
One of, for instance, I recently read Annapurna, A Woman's Place, which is a
book about women mountain climbers, and I'm positive that that one is going to
show up in The City of the Sorceresses, which is two or three years down the
road.
But, when I'm not working specifically between books and when I'm stuck on a
book for a long time. I do read a great deal of fantasy because it's what I like
to read. One of the reasons I write, I say only half facetiously, is because I
never get quite the story I want to read. I'll read somebody else's book and
say, oh, yes, but I want to do something else, and I'll go write a story that
comes out that way. Okay. This next question, you don't have to answer this if
you don't want to. A lot of authors would rather not, but when you do read
fantasy or science fiction, Are there any particular authors that you admire or
think are especially good? Oh yes, there are a great many. I still think Ryder
Haggard is probably the best of fantasy writers. And C.L. Moore, Theodore
Sturgeon, Henry Kuttner have all had a very great influence on me as a merit.
I'm very fascinated by the work of E. Hoffman Price. I love everything Sturgeon
has ever written. I am not really terribly fond of hard science fiction, though
I remember fondly Arthur Clarke's Prelude to Space and some of the very early
Heinleins when I was much younger than I am now. I've sort of outgrown
technology fiction, I think. I love Tolkien, obviously. I am very, very turned
on by the work of Ursula Le Guin. I like Patricia McKillop's work very much. I
think Elizabeth Winn is going to be a very fine writer one of these days. I like
early work a great deal. I think Lisa Tuttle is a good writer. I tend to
gravitate toward women writers because they tend to handle relationships between
people better. Men tend to get so interested in the conquest element. I read,
for instance, a lot of the Conan books before finding out they were all the
same, sort of ho-hum, another day another dragon another damsel in distress yeah
you're right um when you started writing there were what just one or two women
writers in the whole field of science fiction weren't there well there were a
few more although uh not really in the science fiction field i of course have
always been fonder of fantasy and there were great many women in that weird
tales was in It was edited for many, many years by a woman, Dorothy McGillwray.
Famous Fantastic Mysteries was edited by Mary Neitinger. There were a great many
women in fantasy. It was just hard science fiction, which appealed mostly to
young men and to engineering students, or so the editors fondly believed, where
women were sort of taboo. It was like the audience was supposed to be young
white males, and so it was like the audience for Western stories. B.M. Bauer,
Bertha Bauer, had to call herself just B.M. Bauer because they believed that the
young cowboys who read the stuff would not be willing to read stuff by a person
named Bertha, which sounded like a little old lady knitting socks. but she was
one of the very best of Western writers and eventually they were able to cope
with it and let her be so. Let her be what she was. Okay, in the years that
you've been writing science fiction or been involved in it heavily, I guess at
least 30, have you seen any big changes? Well, part of it is when I started
writing it, it was, once again, it was sort of technological daydreams for young
engineering students. A lot about spaceships and journeys to the moon and the
conquest of the stars and gadgets and all that sort of thing. In the middle 40s,
the work of Theodore Sturgeon and, even more, the work of the Kuttner pare. And
anybody who has read the book very seriously knows that Catherine was the
dominant writer of that pare. C. L. Moore wrote a lot of the stuff with the
Kuttner pen name on it because, once again, the audience was supposed to be
mostly male, and the two of them were working so closely together that they
never cared who wrote a specific story. It was all just Kuttner and Moore. But a
lot of the stories that appeared with Hank's name on it were Kuttners. And
Catherine, like many women, is more interested in the effects of gadgets on
people than she was in gadgets, and she almost single-handed reformed the whole
field. There was a time during the 40s and early 50s when the two Cutners wrote
almost everything that appeared in the big magazines under a variety of pen
names. They'd have three or four stories in an issue sometimes. And so
gradually, also because Hank and Catherine were both preparing to work with
psychology, they were both studying to be psychotherapists, they became very
interested in the causes of people's behavior. I think this may be one reason I
admired them so much because I was in the study of psychology myself intending
to be a therapist in special education for children. I found out the work was
too grueling for me and it tore me up too much emotionally because I am too much
of an empath. So I think the big change has been away from technology itself and
into the effect which technology has on people. And then when you start delving
into people's minds what you come to is fantasy under which they cloak their
deepest feelings and desires. You might say the very depths of their unconscious
where nothing is censored. Fantasy is you might say the subconscious with the
sensor off. Turned off or the self sensor turned off. Okay. Excellent. That's a
fine answer. I just have about two more. I wish you'd ask me something about my
new Arthurian novel. that's exactly one of them in fact let's see i think one of
the last books i was looking through of yours at the end of it they had a little
note that she's now working on this a book about arthurian women or something
and that's one of the questions i was going to ask well uh all my life i've been
fascinated by king arthur but even more i've been fascinated by morgan lefay
malorie didn't approve of her and she's been treated as a sort of evil sorceress
you know quote unquote and you can hear the capital letters all the way from to
texas i'm sure So I started wondering who Morgan Le Fay and the Lady of the Lake
really were. And there were a lot of books on the search for the historical
Arthur, but I started out on the search for the historical Morgan Le Fay. How
did she get into the legends? And it led me into the byways of pagan religions,
into Druidism, into I don't mean the modern thing, but what Caesar wrote about,
and enormous amounts of ancient, you might say ancient culture. So I finally
came up with the realization that the whole Arthurian cycle is based upon the
shift from Druidical and Celtic religions to Christianity. And in the Celtic
culture and the Celtic mythology and the Celtic religion, women were preeminent,
whereas in Christianity, St. Jerome and St. Augustine tried to convince every
woman that she should be constantly doing penance and covered with shame for the
very fact that she was a woman. And that ghastly culture shock, I think,
pervaded the whole Arthurian mythos. Mallory didn't get hold of it until later.
Well, then what did you do? You wrote, what, an historical novel then? I took
one element of fantasy. The idea that as our beliefs in the world change, our
world changes with it. The idea that people used to act and believe as if the
world were the center of the universe, and now we know that the sun is at the
center of our galaxy but that we're way out on the edge of it, and that changes
our relationship to ourselves and our world. When people believe that the source
of life was just the mother, and that was one belief system which very firmly
and deeply pervaded their consciousnesses and then when the idea came that the
mother was incidental that that man was uh created in god's image and women was
just a poor imitation it must have been a monster culture shock and so i gave
the idea that the world actually changed at that time uh that the religion the
idea of only having one god instead of a pantheon of god changed people's minds.
So I took one fantasy element, the idea that as these old world, as people's
ideas changed, the world changed too. So the world where the elves lived sort of
went into another dimension, being replaced by a world of pagan religion. And
then when the world changed again, the world of pagan religion, what I call the
world of Avalon, went into the mists. The final title of the book, which Knopf
is publishing this September, it was The Myths of Avalon. I called it Mistress
of Magic, but Knopf is a very staid and conservative, not to say stuffy,
publishing house, and they associated the word mistress in the title with these
sort of I slept with Benedict Arnold or I was Napoleon the Great's lover. And so
they didn't, the kind of book that has a naked lady with an exposed bosom on it.
Right, okay. but then the book's intention is not one of these kinds that's
supposed to be a retelling of the Arthurian legends or anything like that. It's
sort of a telling of the Arthurian legend from a 180 turn as it would look not
from the days of the Christians who worshipped the Father God and conquest but
from the eyes, through the eyes, of the pagans and of the priestesses who saw
the turn to conquest of father god uh one true faith as being a flying in the
face of everything they believed a truly unreligious attitude to the life of the
earth okay listen what we can do on that i i'm glad you gave me the title and
the publisher we'll give the knock for call and see if we can get a copy of that
and um you know go ahead and and have a little show or two on that right before
it comes out you said it'll be september uh-huh yeah that's fine they'd probably
be delighted to hear about it okay good we just did that with a book by um brian
aldis the uh heliconia spring which is a beautiful book i don't know if you read
brian aldis at all i know who he is i've read a couple of his books but he's not
uh he's not one of the people that i uh that i read uh constantly and
addictively as some others i admire his work very much. But it is not the kind
that I'm passionately involved and emotionally committed to. His latest one is
entirely different, This Heliconia Spring. If you get a chance, it's a beautiful
book. Well, I'll certainly have a look round for it. Okay. Listen, one more that
I can think of. David here wants me to ask you about the Society for Creative
Anachronism because he's involved in that himself. Are you still working in
that? I haven't been in it for many years. It got so involved in politics and
politicking and people were not interested nearly so much in going out and
having a good time wearing costumes and being sort of the Middle Ages the way
they should have been. They were interested in becoming a king and getting all
kinds of honors, and I sort of dropped out. But I'm still very interested in the
ideas promoted, but the people who are doing it sort of annoy me. Okay, listen,
is there anything else you would like to... get on the show or anything else
you'd like to mention. We've taken a lot of your time already. Now, just a very
short thing. I am very interested in a lot of the ideas. People are always
asking me why I write science fiction when there are so many other things or why
I'm not into mainstream fiction. And I have written mainstream novels. But my
feeling is that science fiction is a very enchantity, of course. It's a very
valuable genre because it forces people to think. You can't just, oh, I suppose
you can in the slam-bang action stuff. But even in those, there is a residue of
what if the world were different than it is now? People in our society and in
our schools are supposed to keep tight to reality and not imagine things and
don't be so imaginative. And I think imagination is the one great thing that
distinguishes us from the beasts. And science fiction is a very valuable
corrective to modern education because it makes people think, and it forces them
to stretch their imaginations, which gets sort of atrophied in the average
school. In other words, you would be probably one of those writers who think
that science fiction should be kept separate from mainstream? Yes, very strongly
so. If we just integrate it into mainstream and go, you might say, kotoing to
the academics to get into schools and colleges and things, I don't think
anything could hurt science fiction more than becoming required reading in
schools. People should read it because they love it and because they want to
think about the subjects discussed in it. Okay, that's good. Yeah, a lot of
authors, like some of the new way people like Norman Spinrad, for instance, have
told us that they should be one thing, that the division is artificial in the
first place and shouldn't be there. Oh, well, Norman Spinrad. Okay. Well,
listen, Ms. Bradley, this has been an excellent interview. Your answers were
very sharp. I think we'll probably get five or six shows out of this. What we do
is we're on each day of the week for only five minutes, unfortunately. So we
take an interview and sort of chop it up into as many shows as we can, and
usually it lasts for five or six or even seven sometimes shows. So when we get
these edited, I assume, oh, they'll probably be sometime in late July, early
August. We will send you the copies of the tapes. At this time, I don't think
there's a station in your area that's carrying it. So we couldn't send you a
station number where you could hear it, but you will have the tapes exactly as
they will go on the air. Oh, thank you. So listen, we really appreciate your
time, and I am certainly looking forward to your future work. And thank you very
much for the interview. Oh, you're very welcome. It's been nice talking to you.
Bye-bye. Okay, bye. Bye-bye.